I. IPC primitives

   The following proposed IPC mechanism supplies two different primitives: messages and events.
Both of the primitives conform to similar interfaces (they are sent and received) with the exception of
the semantics of how they are actually sent. The first part of this proposal describes the "send" and
"receive" semantics of messages followed by events and then continues to outline some useful or somewhat
necessary extensions to these concepts.

II. Messages

   Messages are an unbuffered, synchronous form of IPC. At the interface level, they are strings
of data with associated lengths up to some fixed size. This data is copied directly from the sender's
message buffer to the receiver's buffer which imposes their synchronous restriction that both
the sender and receiver must be blocked until one acknowledges the other. The implementation would
possibly work as follows:

   * N + 1 page table entries would be reserved for IPC in each address space to accomodate 
     messages up to N pages long (the extra entry is to handle messages not aligned on pages).
     These pages would always be marked supervisor and read-write.

   * The sender attempts to send a message to some arbitrary receiver. If the receiver is not 
     in a RECEIVE_BLOCKED state induced by attempting to receive a message, the sender enters 
     a SEND_BLOCKED state until the receiver actually tries to receive a message.
   
   * The receiver attempt to receive a message from some arbitrary sender. If there are no qualifying
     senders in a SEND_BLOCKED state, the receiver enters a RECEIVE_BLOCKED state subject to the above
     conditions until a message is sent from a qualifying sender.
  
   * Once either a receiver in a RECEIVE_BLOCKED state is sent a message from a qualifying sender
     or a sender in a SEND_BLOCKED state has its message received by the specified sender, the receiver's
     message buffer is mapped into the pages reserved for message IPC in the sender's address space.
     The message is then read out of the sender's buffer and into the mapped pages, obeying 
     any length restrictions the receiver specified. A special optimization case exists for 
     messages <= 8 bytes of data where the message can be copied solely in 2 registers
     and avoid this mapping completely.

   * Both receiver and sender are finally unblocked.

  What happens after the receiver and sender are unblocked is somewhat tricky. Various microkernels
such as QNX switch to the receiver process and allow it to process the request. However, QNX's 
interface makes "send" a complex operation that first sends a message then receives a reply in addition
to its "receive" and "reply" operations. If the sender is allowed to continue instead, it can immediately
execute an appropriate receive operation which will give up it's control, therefor achieving the same
level of functionality without a third operation. This could have slight performance hindrances, but
I cannot see glaring ones at this time. This would take combining two simple system calls to achieve
the functionality of QNX's single third, but reduces the number of system calls exported as well 
as possibly simplifying implementation. Yet, since mapped pages requires invalidating parts of the TLB,
it could be more speed economical to schedule the receiver upon completion, preventing needless 
redumping. Such would require composite IPC operations to be supplied to prevent switching and
the complications of adding them would need to be assessed before considering scheduling
the receiver.

III. Events

   Events are a buffered, asynchronous form of IPC. At the interface level, an event is simply two
double words - the first usually being the class of the event and the second being some other parameter.
This relation is not enforced in any manner and events can simply be used for buffered quad word messages 
if desired. The implementation would possibly work as follows:

    * Every process would have a FIFO buffer storing a fixed number of events. Since events are only
      8 bytes (two dwords), this shouldn't be a problem, and buffers don't need to be extremely large.
      Their length could even possibly be configurable in which case a buffer wouldn't be needed
      unless events were used at all. 
   
    * The sender attempts to send an event to some arbitrary receiver. If the receiver is not in
      a RECEIVE_BLOCKED state induced by attempting to receive a message, the event is placed
      into the FIFO buffer, otherwise the event is placed into the receiver's event buffer directly.
      In either case, the sender is NOT blocked. 

    * The receiver attempts to retrieve an event from some arbitrary sender. If there is no qualifying
      event in the FIFO buffer, the receiver is RECEIVE_BLOCKED. As discussed above, the receiver is 
      unblocked when a qualifying event is sent.

  Deciding which thread is scheduled next is again tricky. Look to the previous discussion under "Messages"
for considerations.

IV. Blocking

   As outlined above, a process can be in a RECEIVE_BLOCKED state with regard to events and in either a 
RECEIVE_BLOCKED state or a SEND_BLOCKED state with regard to messages. Blocking indefinitely, however,
is not always appropriate. To remedy this, one can implement a system call interrupt timer on a per-call
basis or a per-thread basis.
   In a per-call scheme, a timer is supplied or not supplied (to block indefinitely) as a parameter
to the IPC operation. The snag here is that every system call must process the timer argument that
wants to allow for blocked states to be interrupted.
   In a per-thread scheme, a timer is maintained in every thread and is reset and enabled whenever a process
enters a blocked state as a result of a system call. A system call would be supplied to set the reset
value for this timer. The snag with this scheme is that a sequence of calls which vary widely
in timer values would require many calls to set the value of this timer and a set of IPC calls might
need to be supported which simply return failure (i.e. "try_send", "try_receive") instead of blocking if 
the sender/receiver is not ready without resorting to an API call to set the timer reset value to 0. 
Having a separate call to set the timer makes it more convenient for complex timer values of more than one 
parameter, however.
   Beyond message passing operations, two explicitly blocking operations are also required. Firstly,
a system call that blocks until either either an event or message is sent and returns some value
to determine which or error is needed. Lastly, there need be a call to block indefinitely which
can only be interrupted by a timer. The functionality of these could conceivably be combined into a
single call which blocks until any form of IPC is sent from a specified process. Then, a process
could simply wait for IPC from itself.

V. Miscellaneous Considerations

   * Since messages are sent to processes and not individual threads, many threads within a process
     can wait on many messages and many events at once. This could, however, prove hindering if a server
     wants to fork off a thread to handle a request. In such cases, providing facilities for managing
     IPC ports might be useful so that threads can share or not share ports as they please. Message ports
     do, however, add some amount of complexity and are, most likely, not even needed.
   
   * Later performance requirements could demand composite IPC operations like 'call' and 'service'
     that combine send and receive operations and vice versa. This remains to be seen, however.

